PBTS: system model made more precise (#8096)
tendermint/tendermint: spec/consensus/proposer-based-timestamp/pbts-sysmodel_002_draft.md

# PBTS: System Model and Properties

## Outline

 - [System model](#system-model)
   - [Synchronized clocks](#synchronized-clocks)
   - [Message delays](#message-delays)
 - [Problem Statement](#problem-statement)

>  - [Timely Proposals](#timely-proposals)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - [Protocol Analysis - Timely Proposals](#protocol-analysis---timely-proposals)
```

#### **[PBTS-INV-AGREEMENT.0]**

- [Agreement] No two correct processes decide on different values `v`.

This implies that no two correct processes decide on different proposal times
`v.time`.

#### **[PBTS-INV-VALID.0]**

- [Validity] If a correct process decides on value `v`, then `v` satisfies a
  predefined `valid` predicate.

With respect to PBTS, the `valid` predicate requires proposal times to be
[monotonic](./pbts-algorithm_002_draft.md#time-monotonicity) over heights of
consensus:

##### **[PBTS-INV-MONOTONICITY.0]**

- If a correct process decides on value `v` at the height `h` of consensus,
  thus setting `decision[h] = v`, then `v.time > decision[h'].time` for all
  previous heights `h' < h`.

The monotonicity of proposal times, and external validity in general,
implicitly assumes that heights of consensus are executed in order.

#### **[PBTS-INV-TIMELY.0]**

- [Time-Validity] If a correct process decides on value `v`, then the proposal
  time `v.time` was considered `timely` by at least one correct process.

PBTS introduces a `timely` predicate that restricts the allowed decisions based
on the proposal time `v.time` associated with a proposed value `v`.

> As as synchronous predicate, the time at which it is evaluated impacts on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a synchronous predicate, the time at which it is evaluated impacts on
```

whether a process accepts of reject a value based on its proposal time.
For this reason, the Time-Validity property refers to the previous evaluation

> of the `timely` predicate, detailed in the following.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the `timely` predicate, detailed in the following section.
```

## Timely proposals

For PBTS, a `proposal` is a tuple `(v, v.time, v.round)`, where:

- `v` is the proposed value;
- `v.time` is the associated proposal time;
- `v.round` is the round at which `v` was first proposed.

We introduce this definition of proposal because  a value `v` and its
associated proposal time `v.time` can be proposed in multiple rounds, but the
evaluation of the `timely` predicate is only relevant at round `v.round`.

> Considering the algorithm in the [arXiv paper][arXiv], a new proposal is
> produced by a proposer `p` when its `validValue_p` is unset.
> The produced proposal thus have `v.round = round_p` and it is broadcast in a
> Proposal message of with the `validRound` field set to `-1`.

#### **[PBTS-PROPOSAL-RECEPTION.0]**

The `timely` predicate is evaluated when a process receives a proposal.

> More precisely, let `p` be a correct process:

Reviewer 2: Should this section mention `vr = -1` for this logic to be evaluated?

Author: In the TLA+ specification we save the proposal receive time for all Proposals, in followed the same approach here. 

But in fact this time is only relevant when the proposal round matches the proposal's message round, which is the same as saying that valid round = -1.

the round `v.round` at which a value `v` was first proposed.
We call it a *timely* proof-of-lock for `v` because it can only be observed
if at least one correct process considered it `timely`:

#### **[PBTS-TIMELY-POL.0]**

If

- there is a valid `POL(v,r)` with `r = v.round`, and
- `POL(v,v.round)` contains a `PREVOTE` message from at least one correct process,

Then, let `p` is a such correct process:

- `p` received a `PROPOSE` message of round `v.round`, and
- the `PROPOSE` message contained a proposal `(v, v.time, v.round)`, and
- `p` considered the proposal time `v.time` `timely`.

The existence of a such correct process `p` is guaranteed provided that the
voting power of Byzantine processes is bounded by `2f`.

### Derived Proof-of-Locks

The existence of `POL(v,r)` is a requirement for the decision of `v` at round
`r` of consensus.

At the same time, the Time-Validity property established that if `v` is decided
then a timely proof-of-lock `POL(v,v.round)` must have been produced.

So, we need to demonstrate here that any valid `POL(v,r)` is either a timely
proof-of-lock or it is derived from a timely proof-of-lock:

> #### **[PBTS-DERIVED-POL.0]**

Reviewer 2: Really like this section! Very clear.

While *minimum delay* for delivering a proposal to a destination allows defining
an upper bound, the *maximum time* assigned to a proposal.

#### **[PBTS-MSG-DELAY.0]**

There exists a system parameter `MSGDELAY` for end-to-end delays of proposal messages,
such for any two correct processes `p` and `q`:

- If `p` sends a proposal message `m` at real time `t` and `q` receives `m` at

>   real time `t'`, then `t <= t' <= t' + MSGDELAY`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  real time `t'`, then `t <= t' <= t + MSGDELAY`.
```

  predefined `valid` predicate.

With respect to PBTS, the `valid` predicate requires proposal times to be
[monotonic](./pbts-algorithm_002_draft.md#time-monotonicity) over heights of
consensus:

##### **[PBTS-INV-MONOTONICITY.0]**

- If a correct process decides on value `v` at the height `h` of consensus,
  thus setting `decision[h] = v`, then `v.time > decision[h'].time` for all
  previous heights `h' < h`.

The monotonicity of proposal times, and external validity in general,
implicitly assumes that heights of consensus are executed in order.

#### **[PBTS-INV-TIMELY.0]**

- [Time-Validity] If a correct process decides on value `v`, then the proposal
  time `v.time` was considered `timely` by at least one correct process.

PBTS introduces a `timely` predicate that restricts the allowed decisions based
on the proposal time `v.time` associated with a proposed value `v`.
As a synchronous predicate, the time at which it is evaluated impacts on
whether a process accepts or reject a proposal time.
For this reason, the Time-Validity property refers to the previous evaluation
of the `timely` predicate, detailed in the following section.

> ## Timely proposals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Protocol Analysis - Timely proposals
```

round `r`, which means that if the proposer has observed a `POL(v,vr)` with `vr
< r`.
The above operation considers a *correct* proposer, but since a `POL(v,r)` was
produced (by hypothesis) we can affirm that at least one correct process (also)
observed a `POL(v,vr)`.

> Considering the algorithm in the [arXiv paper][arXiv], `v` was proposed by
> the proposer `p` of round `round_p` because its `validValue_p` variable was
> set to `v`.
> The `PROPOSAL` message broadcast by the proposer, in this case, had `vr > -1`,
> and it could only be accepted by processes that also observed a `POL(v,vr)`.

Thus, if there is a `POL(v,r)` with `r > v.round`, then there is a valid
`POL(v,vr)` with `v.round <= vr < r`.
If `vr = v.round` then `POL(vr,v)` is a timely proof-of-lock and we are done.
Otherwise, there is another valid `POL(v,vr')` with `v.round <= vr' < vr`,
and the above reasoning can be recursively applied until we get `vr' = v.round`
and observe a timely proof-of-lock.

## Temporal analysis

In this section we present invariants that need be observed for ensuring that
PBTS is both safe and live.

In addition to the variables and system parameters already defined, we use

> `beginRound(p,r)` to represent the time the process `p` reads from its clock
> when it starts round `r` of consensus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
beginRound(p,r)` as the value of process `p`'s local clock 
when it starts round `r` of consensus.
```

### Safety

The safety of PBTS requires that if a value `v` is decided, then at least one

> correct process `p` considered the associated proposal time `v.time` timely.

Reviewer 2: Pardon my ignorance, by why is it not that`2f+1` or even `f+1` processes have to consider it timely?

Author: `f+1` processes means at least one correct process, that is the condition assumed here. 

For the sake of safety, we need a correct process to consider `v.time` timely. For the sake of liveness, we need all correct processes (`2f+1` of `f+1`) to consider `v.time` timely.

Author: The definition of Time-Validity considers one correct process, it was redefined after some discussion we had.

- `proposalReceptionTime (p,v.round) - MSGDELAY - PRECISION <= v.time <= proposalReceptionTime(p,v.round) + PRECISION`

That is, a correct process `p` started round `v.round` and, while still at
round `v.round`, received a `PROPOSAL` message from round `v.round` proposing
`v`.
Moreover, the reception time of the original proposal for `v`, according with
`p`'s local clock, enabled `p` to consider the proposal time `v.time` as
`timely`.
This is the requirement established by PBTS for issuing a `PREVOTE` for the
proposal `(v, v.time, v.round)`, so for the eventual decision of `v`.

### Liveness

The liveness of PBTS relies on correct processes accepting proposal times
assigned by correct proposers.
We thus present a set of conditions for assigning a proposal time `v.time` so
that every correct process should be able to issue a `PREVOTE` for `v`.

#### **[PBTS-LIVENESS.0]**

If

- the proposer of a round `r` of consensus is correct
- and it proposes a value `v` for the first time, with associated proposal time `v.time`

then the proposal `(v, v.time, r)` is accepted by every correct process provided that:

> - `min{p is correct : beginRound(p,r)} <= v.time <= max{p is correct : beginRound(p,r)}` and

Reviewer 2: Is `beginRound` here the 'global' time or the local time?
From the above definition:
```
to represent the time the process `p` reads from its clock
when it starts round `r` of consensus.
```

I'm a bit unclear if it is the global time _at which_ it reads its clock or the value that it reads from its clock.

It I'm understanding correctly, this is basically saying that `v.time` must be between the times at which the processes enter the round.

Author: `beginRound` is local time. The time a process reads from its clock is the time "displayed" by its clock.

I will consider a less ambiguous way to reference to the local time.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, that sentence is a little bit ambiguous. Maybe, `the value of process `p`'s local clock when it starts round `r` of consensus`. The other way is likely ok, but maybe a little tough to parse.

- `max{p is correct : beginRound(p,r)} <= v.time + MSGDELAY + PRECISION <= min{p is correct : beginRound(p,r+1)}`

The first condition establishes a range of safe proposal times `v.time` for round `r`.

> It is trivially observed if a correct proposer `p` sets `v.time` to the time it
> reads from its clock when starting round `r` and proposing `v`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This condition is trivially observed if a correct proposer `p` sets `v.time` to the time it
reads from its clock when starting round `r` and proposing `v`.
```

Is this what this sentence is saying?

Author: Yep, just reading the local clock before proposing should provide a `v.time` within the established range.

A `PROPOSAL` message sent by `p` at local time `v.time` should not be received
by any correct process before its local clock reads `v.time - PRECISION`, so

> that condition 2. of [PBTS-TIMELY.0] is observed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that condition 2 of [PBTS-TIMELY.0] is observed.
```
